ECE361 Text Conferencing Lab Tutorial 

Getting Started 
Organizing Your Development 
The text conferencing lab is broken down into 2 sections, each due in a different practical. This lab is much 
longer than the file transfer lab and is more open-ended; plan your time accordingly and remember to 
test frequently. If you are working on the client and your partner is working on the server (or vice versa), 
remember to try integrating your code early. In particular, make sure you agree on message formats. 

At the server, one of the first problems you will run into is how to deal with requests from multiple clients 
simultaneously. Similarly, at the client, you will quickly encounter a problem where you need to wait for 
user input on the command line and messages from the server simultaneously. Both are I/O multiplexing 
problems, and there are (at least!) two common approaches for dealing with them: 

1.  Synchronous I/O multiplexing. With this approach, we use special functions to block on multiple 
I/O sources simultaneously—the key point being that as soon as any of them have a message, our 
program unblocks. Blocking refers to a state where our program is stuck waiting for messages. 
2.  Multithreading. With this approach, we use different threads to block on each I/O source at the 
same time. Multithreading is a powerful programming technique, but can be difficult to debug if 
you’re not aware of the issues that can arise (e.g., synchronization). 

In this document, we will go over the basics of these approaches so that you can choose which is best for 
you. Note that your client and server can use different approaches. 

Caution: you may find sample code (e.g., in Beej’s guide) that uses multiple processes to handle requests 
at the server. We do not recommend that approach. Processes are much harder to use for this lab than 
threads,  since  threads  share  the  same  address  space  (and  hence  variables)  but  processes  don’t.  This 
makes it difficult to communicate (e.g., share variables) between processes. 

Testing 
You are required to run your server on a different UG machine than your client(s) when testing your 
code. To ensure proper handling of edge cases, we suggest you test your code with at least 3 clients 
connected to the server; it is fine if these clients are all running on the same machine as each other. 

In the lab sessions, we will ask you to demonstrate the correct functionality of the commands given in 
the lab handout. We have also thought of some scenarios that constitute edge cases! 

Readings 
This lab assumes familiarity with the sockets library used in the File Transfer lab. However, in this lab you 
must  use  TCP  instead  of  UDP;  accordingly,  the  programming  techniques  used  will  be  different.  The 
following  sections  will  provide  reference  material  on  TCP,  synchronous  I/O  multiplexing,  and 
multithreading. 

 
FAQ 
Section 1 
Q: When you send a message in a conference, does that message need to become visible to everyone 
in that session? 
A: Yes, if a user has joined a session then any messages they type (which are not commands) should go 
to everyone in that same session. This text conferencing lab is basically having a server set up a group 
chat between a set of people. 

Q: Is it okay to hardcode a maximum number of sessions at the server? 
A: Yes. Have a graceful way of handling the edge case though. 

Q: Why am I getting an undefined reference to pthread_x? 
A: You are probably not linking with the pthread library. Add LDFLAGS=-pthread to your makefile. 

Q: Why does recv read 0 bytes? 
A: Receiving a message of length 0 when using TCP on Linux means the connection was closed by the 
other end. 

Section 2 
Q: How many additional features do we need to implement? 
A: Two! The marks are split between them evenly. 

Q: What should go in the text file? How long does it need to be? 
A: You should explain what your new functionalities are, how they work, and the rationale behind your 
design (there are no length requirements, so it doesn’t have to be long). Imagine you are reading 
through your code a year from now, trying to remember what new features you chose for this lab and 
how they worked. Now imagine you open your explanation file. What would be helpful to have in there? 

 
 
 
Function Reference: TCP 
In the File Transfer lab, we saw that UDP sockets were message-oriented. Among other things, this 
meant that one call to sendto at the transmitter corresponded to one call to recvfrom at the 
receiver. This is not the case for TCP. 

TCP sockets are stream-oriented (or byte-oriented), meaning that message boundaries are not 
preserved. To put this another way, TCP sockets do not tell us where one message ends and another 
begins—all that TCP sees is a sequence of bytes. The restructuring of received data must be done at the 
application layer, by us. Take a minute to let this sink in! 

As an example, suppose I am the transmitter and you are the receiver. At some point, I send you the 
byte sequence “hello”. A little while later, I send you “world”. 

-  Case 1: If you call the receive function with a buffer of size 10 (big enough to fit everything I sent 

you) then you will read out “helloworld”. 

-  Case 2: If instead you call receive with a size-7 buffer, you will read out “hellowo”. If you call 

receive again you will read out “rld”. 

This example illustrates two major differences from UDP. First, if we transmit two separate byte 
sequences, the receiver cannot distinguish them—instead, it just sees one long sequence. Second, if you 
call the receive function with a buffer that is not sufficiently large to empty the receive queue, then the 
leftover bytes will be returned on subsequent receive calls (rather than being discarded). 

Suggestion: A common technique for dealing with the stream-oriented nature of TCP is to transmit the 
length of the message before transmitting the message itself (you need to figure out an unambiguous 
way to do that). Once the receiver reads out this length, it will know how many more bytes it needs to 
read before it reaches the message boundary. If the receiver reads exactly this many bytes (no more and 
no less), we will effectively have message-oriented TCP. This is not difficult, but it is more nuanced than 
it appears at first glance. For example, suppose we find out that the message is 900 bytes long. We then 
make a call to our receive function with a buffer size of 900 bytes. If 500 bytes are already available, 
then our receive function will return immediately after populating our buffer with those 500 bytes. We 
then need to be careful that next time we call our receive function, we pass in a buffer of only 400 bytes. 
If we passed in a buffer of 900 bytes again, we might accidentally receive part of the next message, 
which could be complicated to deal with! 

A few exercises related to this suggestion (not for marks): 

-  How can we transmit the message length unambiguously? That is, how does the receiver know 

which bytes contain the message length? 

-  How can we ensure that the receiver reads the message length from the socket without reading 

any of the message contents? 

-  What unintended consequences might arise from passing in, e.g., a 2000 byte receive buffer 

when trying to read the message length from the socket? 

socket 
We are already familiar with socket, thanks to the File Transfer lab! The one thing worth pointing out 
is that since we must use TCP for this lab, we will need to pass in SOCK_STREAM as the socket type. 

connect 
connect is used to try to establish a TCP connection. Usually, we use this as a client when trying to 
establish a connection with a server. If connect is successful, then we can start sending and receiving 
data in a reliable, stream-oriented manner. 

1. Socket FD 

2. Desired address information 

3. Size of address information 

int connect(int sockfd, const struct sockaddr *addr, socklen_t addrlen); 

Arguments 

1.  The socket FD we want to use to establish the connection. 
2.  (POINTER) Address we want to connect with. Fill this in with the server’s address information. 
3.  Size of the struct sockaddr passed in for argument 2. 

Return Value 
Returns 0 on success and -1 on failure. If connect fails, it is likely because your server is not running, or 
you entered its address information incorrectly. 

References 

-  https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/connect.2.html 

listen 
Typically, a server will have one special socket called a listener, which does nothing except wait for 
incoming connection requests. When a connection request arrives, the listener reaches under the hood 
in the socket library, indicates that there is a pending connection, and then continues listening. This is 
because the listener’s only job is to listen—it is not responsible for dealing with the connection requests 
(that is what accept is for). 

To mark a socket as a listener, we pass it into the listen function. This function will return 
immediately, and (assuming success) the socket will automatically start listening for connection requests 
in the background. 

1. Listener FD  2. Size of backlog queue 

int listen(int sockfd, int backlog); 

Arguments 

1.  The socket we wish to mark as a listener. 
2.  The maximum number of pending connection requests. This value matters if connection 

requests arrive faster than the server can respond to them. 

Return Value 
Returns 0 on success and -1 on failure. 

References 

-  https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/listen.2.html 

 
 
accept 
Whenever the listener indicates that there is a pending connection, the server can complete that 
connection by calling accept. This function does not make the listener part of the connection; instead, 
it creates a new socket to complete the connection. This way, the listener can keep on listening. 

1. Listener FD 

2. Address information of peer 

int accept(int sockfd, struct sockaddr *restrict addr, 
           socklen_t *restrict addrlen); 

3. Size of peer’s address information 

Arguments (inputs) 

1.  Socket FD of the listener. This socket must be bound and listening. 

Arguments (outputs) 

2.  (POINTER) Like recvfrom, you need to create an empty struct sockaddr_storage and 
pass it into  accept via pointer. The address information of peer (connection initiator) will be 
automatically filled in. 

3.  (POINTER) Same purpose as the addrlen argument for recvfrom. Initialize it the same way. 

Return Value 
Returns the FD for the newly created socket upon success and -1 on failure. To communicate with the 
peer who requested the connection, you will use this new socket. 

References 

-  https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/accept.2.html 

send 
send is used to send a message through a connected socket. As mentioned earlier, be cautious about 
the fact that TCP does not preserve message boundaries. One nice thing about being connected is that 
we don’t need to pass in the destination address every time we send or receive; this is remembered by 
the socket library under the hood. Alternatively, the standard file I/O function write can be used 
instead of send. 

1. Socket FD 

2. Message buffer 

4. Options 

3. Size of message buffer 

ssize_t send(int sockfd, const void *buf, size_t len, int flags); 

Arguments 

1.  The socket FD tells send which socket you want to use to send messages. This socket must be 

connected. 

2.  (POINTER) Pointer to the message (i.e., byte sequence) you want to send. 
3.  Length of the message you want to send (i.e., number of bytes). 

 
 
 
 
 
4.  This argument allows you to specify transmit options, if needed. 

Return Value 
Returns the number of bytes sent on success and -1 on failure. 

References 

-  https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/send.2.html 

recv 
recv is used to receive bytes from a socket. Alternatively, the standard file I/O function read can be 
used instead of recv. 

As has been emphasized throughout this document, when we use TCP the connection becomes stream-
oriented. What this means for us, as programmers, is we need to keep track of where one message ends 
and another begins (one strategy for this was suggested in at the start of the Function Reference: TCP 
section). In any case, messages are not given to us atomically as with UDP, so we need to exercise more 
caution with the recv function to make sure that the logic for receiving messages is correct. 

3. Size of receive buffer 

1. Socket FD 

2. Receive buffer 

4. Options 

ssize_t recv(int sockfd, void *buf, size_t len, int flags); 

Arguments 

1.  The socket FD tells recv which socket you want to receive bytes from. 
2.  (POINTER) Address of buffer for recv to copy received bytes into. 
3.  Length of your receive buffer. This can be thought of as the maximum number of bytes you wish 
to receive. This is a bit different than the story for UDP, and again it comes back to TCP not 
preserving message boundaries (sometimes we might not want to receive more than X bytes, 
because we know that the message currently being received is X bytes long). 

4.  This argument allows you to specify some options, if needed. 

Return Value 
Returns the number of bytes received on success, -1 on failure, and 0 if the connection was closed from 
the other side (i.e., by the peer). 

References 

-  https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/recv.2.html 

 
 
 
Function Reference: Synchronous I/O Multiplexing 
This is a particularly powerful technique for dealing with the I/O multiplexing problem at the server (it can 
also be used at the client though). Some references to help get started include: 

- 
- 

Section 7.3 in Beej’s Guide: https://beej.us/guide/bgnet/html/#select. Highly recommended! 
Linux manual page on select: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/select.2.html 

If you plan on using synchronous I/O multiplexing, you must read section 7.3 from Beej’s Guide because 
it contains an excellent introduction to the topic as well as sample code. There is not much we can add 
that hasn’t already been said, so this section will be shorter than the others. 

select 
Synchronous I/O multiplexing is possible because the select function allows us to monitor sets of FDs 
simultaneously. This is summarized well in Beej’s guide, “select() gives you the power to monitor several 
sockets at the same time. It’ll tell you which ones are ready for reading, which are ready for writing, and 
which sockets have raised exceptions, if you really want to know that”. 

2. Set of FDs to watch for reading 

3. Set of FDs to watch for writing 

1. Highest FD + 1 

int select(int nfds, fd_set *restrict readfds, fd_set *restrict writefds, 
           fd_set *restrict exceptfds, struct timeval *restrict timeout); 

4. Set of FDs to watch for exceptions 

5. Timeout period 

Arguments 

1.  You need to pass in the value of the largest FD in your set, plus one. Make sure you keep this 

value up to date when you add and remove FDs from the set. 

2.  (POINTER) Here, you specify the set of FDs that you want select to monitor for readability. 

From the manual, “A file descriptor is ready for reading if a read operation will not block…After 
select() has returned, readfds will be cleared of all file descriptors except for those that are 
ready for reading”. This last part means that prior to calling select, you might want to make a 
copy of your readfds if you plan to use it again. 

3.  (POINTER) Set of FDs that you want select to monitor for writability. You can pass in NULL if 

you don’t need this. 

4.  (POINTER) Set of FDs that you want select to monitor for exceptions. You can pass in NULL if 

you don’t need this. 

5.  (POINTER) Specifies the maximum amount of time that select should wait before returning. 

You can pass in NULL if you don’t need this. 

Return Value 
Returns the total number of FDs contained in the modified FD sets (read, write, except) on success, -1 on 
failure, and 0 on timeout. 

References 
Section 7.3 in Beej’s Guide and the Linux manual page on select, linked at the start of this section. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Function Reference: Multithreading 
Multithreading can be achieved using the pthreads library. Before using this library, you will need to add 
the following line to your makefile: LDFLAGS=-pthread. Some guides for getting started include: 

1.  POSIX Threads Programming: https://hpc-tutorials.llnl.gov/posix/ 
2.  Linux Tutorial: POSIX Threads: https://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/academic/class/15492-

f07/www/pthreads.html 

3.  Multithreaded Programming (POSIX pthreads tutorial): https://randu.org/tutorials/threads/ 

The key thing to understand is that multiple threads can be used to run tasks in your program 
independently. When programming with multiple threads, we often think of the threads as executing 
concurrently. This can be helpful for identifying scenarios in which threads may conflict with each other, 
and thus need to communicate among themselves or synchronize. In reality, threads do not always 
execute concurrently since their execution is determined by the scheduler within the operating system 
(OS)—this is a detail we will revisit soon. 

When you create a thread, you pass it an entry point, which is a function for it to execute. All programs 
consist of at least one thread (called the main thread) which is given the main function as its entry 
point. With pthreads, to create a thread which runs the function my_func and passes argument 
my_arg into my_func, you can run the following code in your main thread: 

pthread_t new_thread; 
pthread_create(new_thread, NULL, my_func, (void*)&my_arg); 

A few things to note: 

1.  When the new thread returns from my_func, the new thread shuts down. As such, if 
my_func is an infinite loop, then the new thread will continue running forever. 
It may be the case that you want your main thread to wait for the new thread to shut down, in 
this case you can call the function pthread_join from your main thread. Note that this will 
not cause the thread to shut down, you need to figure out some other way of doing that. 

2. 

Before going further, let’s return to the I/O multiplexing problem for the text conferencing lab, where 
you wish to receive messages from multiple sources simultaneously. A multithreaded approach to 
solving this issue would begin by using separate threads to listen to each I/O source independently. For 
example, you could use your main thread to listen to one I/O source and create threads (along with 
functions for them to run) that listen to the other I/O sources. When one of the sources produces a 
message, the thread that’s listening to it will then be able to respond to it while the other threads 
continue listening (or responding) to their own I/O sources. Note that you can call send from one 
thread and recv from another thread on the same socket without issues (source). 

When designing a multithreaded program, remember that threads may execute concurrently (but not 
always). Whether this happens depends on how your OS chooses to schedule the threads, and what the 
state of each thread is. It is possible for a thread to be blocked/waiting, which means it is waiting for a 
resource that is currently being used by a different thread. An example of such a resource is a mutex, 
which we will discuss next. 

 
An important thing to know about threads (of the same process) is that they share the same address 
space, i.e., they can all access and modify global variables in your program. Without going into too much 
detail, let's just say that multiple threads accessing shared variables at the same time can lead to 
unexpected behaviour. To deal with such scenarios, we can make use of a synchronization primitive 
called a mutex. A nice summary can be found on this site: "a Mutex is a lock that we set before using a 
shared resource and release after using it. When the lock is set, no other thread can access the locked 
region of code". When the mutex lock is set, another thread which tries to acquire it will be put into the 
blocked state; this thread will be unblocked when it is its turn to access the shared resource. The 
functions you'll need to know about for mutexes are: 

1.  pthread_mutex_init 
2.  pthread_mutex_lock, pthread_mutex_unlock 

You are not required to use mutexes in your code, but they could be helpful. Remember: if you have 
multiple threads reading or writing the same resource (e.g., variable or data structure), it is almost 
certainly the case that you need to use a mutex to control access to that resource. This site shows an 
example of a mutex in action. 

