ECE361 COMPUTER NETWORKS 

Text Conferencing 

H. TIMORABADI 

 
 
 
 
Objective 

In  this  lab,  you  will  use  UNIX  TCP  sockets  to  implement  a  simple  conferencing 
application. 

Reference 

•  Section  2.4  and  related  sections  on  Berkeley  API  from  Chapter  2  of  the 
Communication Networks by Alberto Leon-Garcia and Indra Widjaja, McGraw Hill, 
2nd Edition, 2004. 

•  The network socket programming “Beej’s Guide to Network Programming” available 

on the University Portal under the course section. 

Assignment Description 

In this assignment, you need to implement a text conferencing application. It consists of a 
server  with  registered  users,  and  several  client  nodes  which  are  the  end  points  for  a 
conference  session.  The  clients  may  be  in  different  networks.  TCP  will  be  used  to 
communicate between the clients and the server.  

Each  client  has  a  unique  name  referred  to  as  the  identifier  (ID).  The  ID  of  a  node  is 
unique among participating nodes. The server is assumed to have a list of client IDs that 
it will accept, and each ID is associated with  a password (perhaps  taken through a user 
registration procedure). A client must first log into the server with its ID and the server’s 
IP address. 

When  a  client  wishes  to  communicate  with  other  clients,  it  must  create  a  conference 
session on the server. A conference session is simply a list of clients that are sending text 
messages to one another. Any message sent by a single user is seen by all clients that are 
participating  in  the  conference  session.  It  is  the  server’s  responsibility  to  multicast  the 
text data to all participating clients. 

You will implement both the server and the client processes. 

Protocol  

We  use  two  categories  of  messages:  data  and  control.  Control  messages  are  used  for 
initiating the client-server interaction, session creation, invitation, termination, etc. Since 
you are using TCP, you do not need to use acknowledgements for reliability. You only 
need acknowledgements for success/failure conditions at the server, e.g. whether login is 
successful. 

You must use the following structure for data and control messages: 

 
 
 
 
 
struct message { 

unsigned int type; 
unsigned int size; 
unsigned char source[MAX_NAME]; 
unsigned char data[MAX_DATA]; 

}; 

The type field indicates the type of the message, as described in the table below. The size 
field  should  be  set  to  the  length  of  the  data.  The  source  field  contains  ID  of  the  client 
sending the message. 

The following table shows all control packets that must be implemented: 

Type 
LOGIN  

LO_ACK 

LO_NAK 

EXIT 

JOIN 

JN_ACK 

JN_NAK 

Packet Data 
<password> 

<reason for 
failure> 

<session ID> 
<session ID> 
<session ID, reason 
for failure> 

LEAVE_SESS   
NEW_SESS 

<session ID> 

NS_ACK 

MESSAGE 

QUERY 

QU_ACK 

<message data> 

<users and 
sessions> 

Table 1. Packet types 
Function 
Login with the server 
Acknowledge successful login 

Negative acknowledgement of login 

Exit from the server 
Join a conference session 
Acknowledge successful conference session join 

Negative acknowledgement of joining the session 

Leave a conference session 
Create new conference session 
Acknowledge new conference session 
Send a message to the session or display the message 
if it is received 
Get a list of online users and available sessions 

Reply followed by a list of users online 

Although you are required to use this protocol and struct, the serialization and 
deserialization approach is up to you. For example, you can use “:” to separate fields of 
the struct when you serialize it (as in the File Transfer lab), but if you want to experiment 
with a different approach that is fine too. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section 1 

Client Program (client.c):  

You  should  implement  a  client  program,  called  “client.c”,  in  C  on  a  UNIX  system.  Its 
command line input should be as follows: 

 client 

Upon execution, the client program will wait for user input on the command line. 

The login process should be clear from the available messages and command parameters. 
You  may  assume  that  the  passwords  are  sent  and  received  in  plain  text.  TCP  is  a 
bidirectional protocol, so once a connection has been established between the client and 
the server, communication may proceed. 

Once the client has logged in and joined a session, it will need to wait for messages from 
the server and at the same time continue to wait for user input on the command line. You 
will need a strategy for dealing with these two I/O sources simultaneously (e.g., starting a 
receive thread, or using non-blocking sockets). 

The client must implement the following commands on the stdin file stream: 

/login <client ID> 
<password> <server-IP> 
<server-port> 

/logout 

/joinsession <session ID> 

/quit 

<text> 

Table 2. Client commands 
Log into the server at the given address and port. The IP 
address is specified in the dotted decimal format 
Log out of the server, but do not exit the client. The client 
should return to the same state as when you started 
running it 
Join the conference session with the given session ID 
Leave the currently established session 

Get the list of the connected clients and available sessions 
Terminate the program 
Send a message to the current conference session. The 
message is sent after the newline 

/leavesession 
/createsession <session ID>  Create a new conference session and join it 
/list 

Here is an example of how clients in a session would work: 

Client 1: 

1.  Run the program: ./client 
2.  /login jill eW94dsol 128.100.13.140 5000 
3.  /createsession lab_help 

Client 2: 

1.  Run the program: ./client 
2.  /login jack 432wlFd 128.100.13.140 5000 
3.  /list  /* Returns a list of users and the sessions they joined */ 
4.  /joinsession lab_help 
5.  Hi Jill! This is Jack. How are TCP sockets different from UDP sockets? 

 
 
In  this  section,  a  client  is  only  allowed  to  join  one  session.  As  such,  the  server  should 
check whether a client is currently in a session or not.  

Server Program (server.c): 

You should implement a server program, named “server.c”, in C on a UNIX system. Its 

command input should be as follow: 

 server <TCP port number to listen on> 

You should have a strategy to deal with unavailable port numbers. For example, you can 
use the UNIX netstat command to find out which ports are available on the system. 

Upon  execution,  the  server  should  wait  for  connections  from  the  clients  in  the  system. 
The server acts as both a conference session router and a database. 

For the database part:  

•  The server has  access  to  a  client  list with passwords (which can be hard coded 

into your program or kept as a database file).  

•  The server should keep an up-to-date list of all connected clients in the system, 
as well as their session id, and IP and port addresses. The server should delete a 
conference session when the last user of the session leaves. 

The  server  should  acknowledge  some  client  requests  (i.e.  login  and  join  session).  You 
should deal with the possibility of a client attempting to log in with an ID that is already 
connected.  

The  server  implements  the  conference  functionality  of  the  system  by  forwarding 
messages  intended  for  a  conference  session  to  all  the  clients  registered  for  that 
session. This process should be transparent to the receiving clients. 

 
 
 
 
Section 2: Additional Features 

In  this  section,  you  must  implement  TWO  additional  features.  Some  important 
constraints: 

1.  The  commands  from  section  1  (see  Table  2)  must  remain  unchanged. 
Implement new commands if needed, rather than modifying the existing ones. 
2.  Your additional features must not be subsets of each other. This is not an issue for 
the features listed below, but be careful of this if you propose your own features. 

A list of approved features is included below (remember: pick exactly TWO features). 
You can also propose your own features, but if you choose to go this route you must get 
approval  from  a  TA  either  on  Piazza  or  via  email.  You  are  allowed  to  implement  any 
features that are approved on Piazza, regardless of who proposed them. 

1.  Multiple sessions. 

a.  Client:  Allow  a  clients  to  join  multiple  sessions.  You  should  clearly 

indicate on the client’s terminal the session ID of every message. 

b.  Server:  Keep  all  sessions  that  the  client  joined.  You  should  carefully 

design the up-to-date list (i.e., the output of /list) to reflect this. 

2.  Session invites. 

a.  Client:  Implement  a  procedure  for  a  client  to  invite  other  clients  into  a 
session. You must provide a protocol for a client to either accept or refuse 
an invitation. 

b.  Server: The server should be able to forward invitations and corresponding 

messages to the specific clients. 

3.  Inactivity timer. 

a.  Server:  Disconnect  clients  that  have  been  inactive  for  a  long  time, 
regardless  of  whether  they’re  in  a  session.  Note:  the  timer  and 
disconnection decision must be implemented at the server. 
b.  Client: Gracefully handle being disconnected from the server. 

4.  Private messaging. Clients can send private messages to each other, regardless of 
which session the sender and receiver  are in  (if any). Private messages  are only 
viewable by the target client, and it must be clear who the sender is. 

5.  User  registration.  If  a  client  does  not  already  have  a  username  and  password  to 
log  in  with,  it  can  register  with  the  server  to  create  an  account.  This  login 
information  must  be  persistent,  i.e.,  if  the  server  is  restarted,  any  users  who 
registered dynamically must still be able to log in. 

6.  Session admins.  When a client  creates a session, they become the admin of that 
session. A session admin can kick another client out of the session. They can also 
give the admin position to someone else. There must be a way for other clients to 
see who the admin of a session is. 

You should provide a text file to explain your design and implementation. 

 
Deliverables 

The following should be submitted and be available for your demo lab session: 

•  The  client  and  server  programs.  All  code  must  be  readable,  with  meaningful 
comments.  If  you  use  encryption  for  the  passwords,  make  sure  you  use  simple 
passwords and make them available separately. Your code must be able to run on 
the UG machines. 
It  wouldn’t  be  a  bad  idea  to  have  a  set  of  meaningful  test  cases  or  scenarios, 
which will test most of the functionality. 

• 

•  Set of Makefiles and/or UNIX scripts that simplify the compilation. 
•  The text file to explain Section 2.  

Notes 

•  This lab is long so you should allocate a proper amount of time for finishing it.  
•  For easy inspection, you may want to separate your code into more than two files; 

however, you will neither be punished nor rewarded for this. 

•  For  electronic  submission,  only  one  person  in  the  group  should  submit  the  file. 
You  should create a tar  ball (e.g., a4.tar.gz) with  all the files  needed to  compile 
and  run  your  programs.  You  should  also  include  a  Makefile  in  the  tar  ball  that 
compiles all your source code into two executables: one named server and one 
named client. 

•  The following command can be used to tar your files (where X is the lab number, 

ranging from 4 to 5 for the Text Conferencing lab): 
  tar –czvf aX.tar.gz <files to tar> 

•  Use the following command on the eecg UNIX system to submit your code: 

  submitece361s X aX.tar.gz 

•  You can perform the electronic submission any number of times before the actual 
deadline. A resubmission of a file with the same name simply overwrites the old 
version. The following command lists the files you have submitted: 
  submitece361s -l X 

•  You  are  expected  to  explain  the  design  choices  made  in  your  code  to  the  TAs 
during your demo  lab session. The lab specifications  are similar to  but  different 
from  those  in  previous  years  in  subtle  ways.  This  will  make  it  easy  to  spot 
plagiarized code. 

 
